
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Policy Statement 
Improving the health and efficiency of buildings with insulation 
  


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 2 
CONTENTS 
ABOUT US 2 
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT 2 
THE ROLE AND VALUE OF INSULATION 3 
RECOMMENDATIONS 4 
Energy Efficiency First principle 4 
Recommendation 1 4 
Insulation in government programs and schemes 5 
Recommendation 2 5 
Insulation in government procurement 6 
Recommendation 3 6 
Insulation in social and community housing 6 
Recommendation 4 6 
Regulatory and compliance measures for insulation 7 
Recommendation 5 7 
Recommendation 6 7 
Recommendation 7 8 
Recommendation 8 8 
Training and certification for the insulation workforce 9 
Recommendation 9 9 
Recommendation 10 9 
Recommendation 11 9 
 
ABOUT US 
The Affiliated Insulation Industry Coalition (AIIC) is a collective of insulation trade associations 
including the Australian Modern Building Alliance (AMBA), Insulation Australasia (IA) and the 
Insulation Council of Australia & New Zealand (ICANZ), each representing different product 
types and installation services.  The collaborative activity of this group is informed by the 2024 
Roadmap for Insulation Installation in Australia. The roadmap was signed by leading industry 
groups representing the insulation supply chain, manufacturers, the building sector, insulation 
installers, and electricians. 
 
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT 
This policy statement formally outlines the AIIC’s priorities and preferred approach to the 
improvement of insulation and thermal performance outcomes in Australian homes and 
buildings.  

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
THE ROLE AND VALUE OF INSULATION 
Insulation is used in buildings to reduce the movement of heat and sound. A wide range of 
products are used to insulate buildings. These include batts, panels, loose-fill, sprays, structural 
insulated panels, and building membranes.  
When new and existing buildings have adequately specified and installed insulation, the benefits 
to the community include:  
• Reducing Australia’s annual emissions, potentially by 7.1 million tonnes of CO2e.1 
• Improving outcomes in physical, social, and mental health by better insulating homes and 
workplaces. Studies have shown for every dollar invested in vulnerable households, $7-
10 in benefits are returned.2 
• Complementing efficient electrification of space heating and cooling, enabling occupants 
to pre-heat and cool homes with minimal energy waste, and take best advantage of 
household solar. 
• Enabling the right sizing of space heating and cooling systems, household batteries and 
other infrastructure – reducing the costs of these upgrades, and the materials required to 
complete them.  
• Promoting grid reliability by better matching supply and demand in an energy system 
powered by renewables. 
• Making reverse cycle heating more comfortable by increasing internal surface 
temperatures, thus preventing cooled air creating a cold draught.  
• Helping to reduce energy bills through decreased need to run heating and cooling. 
• Reducing external noise, condensation, and the possibility of mould. 
• Achieving appropriate fire resistance in a cost-effective manner. 
• Enhancing the climate resilience of homes.  
 
More than eight million Australian homes were built prior to mandatory minimum energy 
efficiency requirements, and a substantial portion of these homes lack basic measures to ensure 
thermal comfort and safety such as insulation. Many of these homes are occupied by Australia’s 
most vulnerable people, and the poor performance of these dwellings presents long-term risks to 
health, comfort, and welfare of their inhabitants. A coordinated residential rehabilitation process 
is needed to address this issue.  
Further, more should be done to lift standards of quality in installation of insulation in new builds 
and major renovations, including taking advantage of modern digital tools to better monitor 
compliance and assess conformance of the insulation product. 
 
  
 
1 ASBEC, The Bottom Line – household impacts of delaying improved energy requirements in the Building Code, 2018. 
2 Sustainability Victoria, The Victorian Healthy Homes Program Research findings, 2022, and Grimes et al., Cost Benefit Analysis of 
the Warm Up New Zealand: Heat Smart Programme Ministry of Economic Development, 2012. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 4 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The AIIC agree that the below suite of recommendations can raise and protect the living 
standards of Australians by making homes healthier and cheaper to run, while accelerating the 
transition to net zero, and enhancing their climate safety. Recommendations in this document 
are intended to be practically implementable in the near to mid-term and provide a solid 
foundation for increasing the safe installation of quality insulation product in Australian homes 
and businesses. 
 
 
Energy Efficiency First principle 
The European Union (EU) prioritises energy efficiency in decision making processes concerning 
or impacting energy systems. While taking full account of security of supply and market 
integration, the Energy Efficiency First principle aims to ensure that: 
• Only the energy really needed is produced. 
• Investments in stranded assets are avoided. 
• Demand for energy is reduced and managed in a cost-effective way.3 
Before building out energy generation, transmission of distribution infrastructure, efficiency 
measures should be adopted to reduce energy demand. This ensures that energy is used as 
effectively as possible, reducing demand, and lowering overall consumption. This lowering of 
consumption helps to reduce emissions, and alleviate the need to build extensive, expensive, 
energy infrastructure. This is particularly important as Australia navigates the clean energy 
transition.  
Insulation fits with this principle, as a building's thermal envelope directly reduces the need for 
additional energy to maintain comfortable indoor temperatures. Combined with appropriate 
window coverings, shading, and draft proofing, insulation in walls, ceilings and floors reduces 
heat loss in winter and heat gain in summer, meaning that homes and buildings require much 
less energy for heating and cooling. This approach makes it easier for occupants to pre-heat or 
cool their homes with minimal energy input, resulting in lower bills and a reduced demand on the 
energy grid, especially during peak times.  
Well insulated homes are also better equipped to capitalise on household solar systems. With 
efficient insulation, the energy generated by rooftop solar panels can be used more effectively to 
maintain indoor temperatures without significant loss through walls, ceilings, and floors. This can 
contribute to reduction in reliance on grid power when solar production is low, supporting 
reduced energy cost at a household level, and overall grid stability.  
Recommendation 1 
Australia should follow the lead of the EU and adopt an Energy Efficiency First principle 
to decision making processes concerning or impacting energy systems. This includes 
decisions regarding the building and retrofitting of Australia’s housing infrastructure. 
 
 
 
 
3 European Commission, Energy Efficiency First principle.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 5 
Insulation in government programs and schemes 
Ensuring that our homes are healthy, affordable, and decarbonised is a national infrastructure 
issue that requires a coordinated approach. Homes are not short-lived consumer goods – they 
generally last for decades and have dozens of occupants over their lifespan. 
Energy efficiency schemes in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and the Australian 
Capital Territory have delivered substantial savings for consumers right across the energy 
system through incentives for energy efficiency upgrades. However, at present, only the 
Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania provide support to increase insulation uptake. 
Households and businesses in all jurisdictions would benefit from programs and schemes that 
incentivise the deployment of ceiling, wall, and floor insulation as an energy efficiency 
technology.  
Governments are by no means limited to adopting similar programs to those already tested in 
the states and territories, however existing knowledge and experience does provide 
governments with opportunity to adopt, adapt and streamline. Recent activity that could be built 
on is the Energy Saver Loan Scheme in Tasmania and the Victorian Healthy Homes Program.  
There are also many learning opportunities available from energy efficiency programs overseas. 
Common characteristics of these programs include a focus on social and low socioeconomic 
housing, priority for whole of home solutions, training and certification requirements for installers, 
and product and service coverage through long term guarantees.  
The insulation industry has worked hard to ensure strong industry training and independent 
third-party product certification options exist to give governments confidence that programs 
including insulation can proceed safely. 
Recommendation 2  
Governments should implement programs and schemes that increase the uptake of 
insulation. These programs should include the following characteristics: 
• Training: installers contracted to undertake insulation work hold an EEC Certified 
Insulation Installer certification, or equivalent. 
• Electrical safety: an electrical safety inspection undertaken by a licensed electrician 
prior to installation. 
• Product: insulation materials used have independent third-party building product 
certification through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark 
Certification Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme. 
• Application: fit for purpose application of products supported by appropriate warranties. 
• Compliance: a ‘certificate of insulation installation’ should be required for all installations 
supported by governments and programs and schemes include compliance activity such 
as independent audit, with material consequences for non-compliance.  
• Stability: programs and schemes run for steady, sustained periods of time to avoid 
goldrush scenarios that create conditions for non-certified installers and non-conforming 
product to flood the market.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 6 
Insulation in government procurement  
Procurement rules are designed to ensure the Government and taxpayers get value for money. 
There is a substantial body of evidence to support that insulated properties reduce running costs 
and provide additional value for occupants such as increased comfort and better health 
outcomes.  
Lifting standards in the insulation industry for work funded by governments will set a strong 
precedent for the broader market and drive positive behaviour and ensure that taxpayer funds 
are used to deliver upgrades that meet high standards of quality and safety and use workers 
who are appropriately skilled and empowered to be safe on the job. 
Recommendation 3  
Governments should review procurement guides and guidelines to ensure that: 
• All installers contracted to undertake insulation work are required to hold an EEC 
Certified Insulation Installer certification, or equivalent. 
• An electrical safety inspection is undertaken by a licensed electrician prior to every 
installation. 
• All insulation materials procured have independent third-party building product 
certification through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark 
Certification Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme. 
• Product application should be fit for purpose and supported by appropriate warranties.  
• A ‘certificate of insulation installation’ should be required for all installations supported by 
governments.  
 
 
Insulation in social and community housing  
The long-term welfare of vulnerable households is best served by improving the health and 
comfort of their homes and providing them support to reduce energy demand (therefore cost) 
through energy efficiency upgrades – this includes making sure that all social housing, including 
public and community housing, is appropriately insulated.   
Recommendation 4 
Governments should commit to working with relevant stakeholders to undertake 
comprehensive insulation retrofits to all social housing, including public and community 
housing, by 2030: 
• At minimum, insulation in public and community housing should be upgraded in line with 
National Construction Code 2022 climatic zone standards.  
• Wall and floor insulation should be included in retrofits, with consideration for factors 
such as climate and construction type.  
• All installers contracted to undertake insulation work should be required to hold an EEC 
Certified Insulation Installer certification, or equivalent.  
• An electrical safety inspection is undertaken by a licensed electrician prior to every 
installation. 
• Insulation materials used have independent third-party building product certification 
through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark Certification 
Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme.  
• Fit for purpose application of products supported by appropriate warranties.  
• A ‘certificate of insulation installation’ is supplied for all installations.  
 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 7 
Regulatory and compliance measures for insulation 
While it is important that we do not impose unnecessary regulatory burden on businesses, 
individuals and community organisations, more regulatory intervention and compliance activity 
related to insulation is needed.  
 
Key reasons to increase regulatory and compliance measures around insulation include: 
• Stimulation of residential rehabilitation activity in millions of poorly performing homes. 
• Keeping insulation installers safe on the job. 
• Protecting the community through reducing the prevalence of non-conforming product 
and poor-quality installation work.  
• Efficient, cost-effective delivery of wider government and societal goals such as 
decarbonisation, the climate proofing of housing infrastructure, lowering energy prices, 
and increasing health and comfort. 
 
Recommendation 5 
Governments should consider regulatory interventions to stimulate residential 
rehabilitation, keep installers safe, and improve standards of quality and conformance.  
Interventions should include the following characteristics: 
 
• Training: installers contracted to undertake insulation work hold an EEC Certified 
Insulation Installer certification, or equivalent. 
• Electrical safety: an electrical safety inspection undertaken by a licensed electrician 
prior to installation. 
• Product: insulation materials used have independent third-party building product 
certification through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark 
Certification Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme. 
• Application: fit for purpose application of products supported by appropriate warranties. 
• Compliance: a ‘certificate of insulation installation’ should be required for all installations 
supported by governments and programs and schemes include compliance activity such 
as independent audit, with material consequences for non-compliance.  
• Consistency: governments should collaborate with other jurisdictions to ensure 
interventions across the country are as consistent as possible to avoid duplication of 
effort and unnecessary burden and regulatory confusion for industry.  
 
Recommendation 6 
Many renters around Australia live in poor quality housing that is expensive to heat/cool and are 
not suitable to help maintain health and comfort. The introduction of minimum energy efficiency 
standards that ensure that insulation is in place in rental homes will help improve energy 
performance, increase thermal comfort, and ensure homes are net zero compatible and climate 
resilient into the future.  
Governments should introduce minimum energy efficiency standards that ensure that 
insulation is in place in rental properties: 
• At minimum, insulation in rental properties should be upgraded in line with National 
Construction Code 2022 climatic zone standards. 
• All installers undertaking this insulation work should hold an EEC Certified Insulation 
Installer certification, or equivalent.  
• An electrical safety inspection undertaken by a licensed electrician should take place 
prior to installations. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 8 
• Insulation materials used have independent third-party building product certification 
through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark Certification 
Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme.  
• Fit for purpose application of products supported by appropriate warranties. 
• A ‘certificate of insulation installation’ is provided for all installations.  
 
Recommendation 7 
There is a case to require the disclosure of residential energy efficiency ratings when homes are 
sold. Mandatory disclosure of energy efficiency ratings helps prospective purchasers understand 
the often-hidden energy performance of buildings and helps build the case for action to improve 
this performance. Similar schemes have been implemented in other countries since the 1980s.  
In 2010, the Australian Government introduced a requirement for energy efficiency ratings to be 
disclosed when large offices are advertised for sale or lease, and this has played a major role in 
the energy use per square metre  in rated office buildings declining by over 50 per cent between 
2011 and 2022.  
The implementation of mandatory disclosure of energy efficiency ratings for homes at the time 
they are sold could stimulate further residential rehabilitation activity for homes outside of rental 
and social housing markets.  
Governments should introduce mandatory energy rating disclosure:  
• The energy efficiency ratings of residential buildings should be disclosed at point of sale, 
using a universal, nationally consistent rating scheme.  
 
Recommendation 8 
Installers around the country are regularly witnessing examples of poorly installed insulation in 
properties built after the introduction of minimum standards. It is clear further compliance activity 
is required in new build to ensure that insulation is installed properly.  
The construction industry has raised concerns regarding the cost of increased compliance 
activity associated with insulation in the past, however there are now a host of digital tools 
available that could be used by building inspectors and certifiers as a low-cost approach to 
improving compliance. 
Governments should improve general compliance and enforcement systems for 
installation of insulation in new build and major renovations: 
• Undertake a review to ensure insulation requirements are clearly specified in building 
documentation, this includes a requirement for a ‘certificate of insulation installation’.  
• Consider how digital tools (such as time-and-location stamped photographs) could be 
better utilised to cost-effectively incorporate increased quality checks of insulation 
installation in new build.  
• Support industry groups to offer funded training programs on working with and around 
insulation at the apprentice and certified tradesperson level. 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
AIIC POLICY STATEMENT, NOVEMBER 2024 9 
Training and certification for the insulation workforce  
Education, training, and certification are critical for ensuring quality and safety, as they equip 
professionals with the knowledge and skills needed to properly install, maintain, and assess 
insulation work, while maximising quality and minimising risk. These measures also ensure 
compliance with industry standards and regulations. 
 
Recommendation 9 
Develop a national skillset for insulation installation:  
• A national skillset and qualification should be developed for insulation installation, based 
on the current package relied on to become an EEC Certified Installer.  
 
Recommendation 10 
Develop a new certification, qualification, or license for insulation installers in new builds 
and major renovations:  
• The current EEC Certified Insulation Installer Certification is best suited to insulation 
installers in the retrofit space. A new certification, qualification, or license for insulation 
installers working in new builds and major renovations should be developed based on 
national skillset units (if available) and/or existing industry training as appropriate.  
  
Recommendation 11 
Develop training for insulation inspectors: 
• Those that conduct building/insulation inspections or other ‘audits’ may require additional 
training to correctly and rapidly assess whether insulation has been installed in 
accordance with relevant requirements

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
 
