
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Insulation in Australia 
2024 
 
 
 
  


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 2 
CONTENTS 
FOREWORD 3 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4 
THE VALUE OF INSULATION 7 
QUALITY AND SAFETY 12 
MARKET UPDATE  13 
POLICY AND REGULATORY ACTIVITY 20 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION INDUSTRY REPORT 2024 3 
Foreword 
The Affiliated Insulation Industry Coalition (AIIC)  is a collective of 
insulation trade associations including the Australian Modern Building 
Alliance (AMBA), Insulation Australasia (IA), and the Insulation Council of 
Australia & New Zealand (ICANZ), each representing different product types 
and installation services.  
The shared activity of this group is informed by the 2021 Roadmap for 
quality control and safety in insulation installation, which was developed and 
signed by over 40 organisations. 
We believe that better insulating our building stock is vital to accelerating the transition to 
net zero, futureproofing and enhancing the climate safety of Australian homes, and 
protecting the health of Australians now and into the future. 
Our industry is mature, with stro ng local advanced manufacturing capability  and healthy global 
supply chains.  
With the support of the right policy and regulatory settings, the insulation industry can make an 
even more substantive contribution to ensuring Australia’s buildings are net zero compatible, 
adaptable to changing climate conditions, healthy, and affordable to run.  
Our organisations are committed to a thriving insulation industry, supporting a healthy, comfortable 
and climate resilient Australia for generations to come.  This report underscores that aim by 
demonstrating the benefits that can be provided by insulation  and encouraging further action to 
unlock them. 
 
Jim Hall 
Chair, Affiliated Insulation Industry Coalition  
 
 
  


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 4 
Executive Summary 
INSULATION SUPPORTS THE TRANSFORMATION OF 
AUSTRALIA’S ENERGY SYSTEM  
Australia’s energy system is transforming alongside a push toward ambitious global 
commitments to reach net zero. A unit of energy saved is a unit of energy that we don’t need to 
decarbonise. 
Together with the more challenging and expensive actions to support these aims, such as 
building new infrastructure and transforming energy markets, Australia must take action to 
progress the roll out of existing, proven, and cost-effective technology options that ensure net 
zero compatibility in buildings, and the reliability of the energy system into the future.  
Improving energy efficiency in Australia’s built environment will make a significant contribution to 
the energy transition. In Australia, energy efficiency and electrification can deliver 14 per cent 
and 26 per cent of Australia’s emissions reductions, respectively, at low cost.1  
Buildings with high thermal performance benefit occupants and energy system as a whole. They 
place the lowest demands on the grid by reducing the volume of energy required to maintain 
comfortable internal temperatures, which is particularly valuable during times of peak demand. 
Energy efficient buildings with good thermal performance are also better able to resist weather 
extremes.  
INSULATION IS A HEAVY HITTER FOR IMPROVING ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY 
In the mix of available energy efficiency technologies to improve Australia’s built environment, 
insulation is a heavy hitter. Top level benefits include:  
▪ Reducing Australia’s annual emissions, potentially by 7.1 million tonnes of CO2e.2 
▪ Improving outcomes in physical, social, and mental health by better insulating homes and 
workplaces – studies have shown for every dollar invested in vulnerable households, $7-
10 in benefits are returned.3 
▪ Complementing efficient electrification of space heating and cooling, enabling occupants 
to pre-heat and cool homes with minimal energy waste, and take best advantage of 
household solar. 
▪ Enabling more accurate sizing of space heating and cooling systems, household batteries 
and other infrastructure – reducing the costs of these upgrades, and the materials 
required to complete them.  
▪ Promoting grid reliability by better matching supply and demand in an energy system 
powered by renewables. 
▪ Making reverse cycle heating more comfortable by increasing internal surface 
temperatures, thus preventing cooled air creating a cold draught.  
 
1 Northmore Gordon 2023, Energy efficiency scenario modelling.  
2 Industry-led roadmap for quality control and safety in insulation installation, p.4. 
3 See the value of insulation section of this report.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 5 
MORE SHOULD BE DONE TO ENABLE GREATER LEVELS OF 
THERMAL PERFORMANCE IN AUSTRALIA 
Three fundamental tools to help improve the energy performance of households should 
be implemented in Australia: energy performance rating, disclosure, and minimum rental 
standards.  
Despite the clear benefits and potential for public and private investment, reliable data on 
insulation and energy efficiency levels in Australian building stock is not currently available.  
 
This is a barrier to the development of a sophisticated understanding of the number of retrofits 
required to bring Australia’s built environment up to a net zero compatible, climate resilient level, 
and to the development and implementation of effective policy and regulatory interventions in 
Australia.  
  
It is therefore important that Australia develops a more sophisticated understanding of its building 
stock. This could be achieved through the national introduction of mandatory disclosure of energy 
efficiency ratings for homes at the time they are sold. These ratings would need to be underpinned 
by a nationally agreed energy performance rating tool. 
 
International jurisdictions (and the Australian Capital Territory) have had successful residential 
building rating and disclosure measures in place for existing buildings for decades, and evidence 
shows this has a material effect on the market, working to raise the average efficiency 
performance of buildings.4  
In Australia there is very little policy and/or regulatory intervention to improve the thermal 
performance of existing homes. 
 
Insulation offers a comparatively cheap and effective means of significantly improving the energy 
efficiency of buildings. However, unlike many other products supporting energy efficiency, there 
are few government incentives which support improving the thermal performance of homes. This 
is challenging, as many households are not empowered to undertake significant energy 
performance upgrades (which are often perceived as a luxury), without education, 
encouragement, and support.   
Although mandatory disclosure of energy efficiency ratings at point of sale  would improve 
Australian data on housing stock and support buyers to make informed decisions about the energy 
performance of their purchase, support is also needed for building owners to improve the thermal 
performance of their properties once it’s been identified as an issue.  
 
Little is being done to assist renters, who lack agency, incentive, or any real ability to make 
alterations to rental dwellings . Regulations to ensure that landlords provide a safe and healthy 
environment with an acceptable level of energy performance are required to improve rental home 
conditions. Without these standards, the split incentives that deliver a near universally poor 
standard of rental accommodation will continue, to the detriment of tenants.  
 
These interventions should be complemented by support for landlords and householders. Whether 
this be through direct subsidy , discount, or through the provision of low or no interest finance 
options – as we’ve seen recently in the ACT and Tasmania.  
 
4 ACIL Allen, 2015, Commercial building disclosure program review final report , p.ii-iiii and Department of Industry, Science, Energy 
and Resources, National framework for disclosure of residential energy efficiency information, Australian Government, 2021, p.5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 6 
IT’S TIME TO ACT 
Without government support (whether through incentives, the utilisation of regulatory drivers, or 
both), Australia’s underperforming housing stock is unlikely to be upgraded to the standard needed 
to adapt to a warming climate and to best manage demand through the energy transition. This will 
result in poor financial and health outcomes for millions of Australians.  
 
The good news is that the data available clearly demonstrates that where policy and 
regulatory intervention is made, positive results follow.  
 
This is perhaps demonstrated best by the ACT, which has the most supportive policy and 
regulatory environment for insulation and enjoys the highest share of well insulated buildings.   
 
Outside of the ACT, while evidence of improved building standards is evident, it’s clear more could 
be done to improve the thermal performance of buildings, especially in existing homes.  
 
The data aligns with the message industry has and will continue to send, which is that Australia’s 
states and territories have been leaving the opportunity to improve thermal performance on the 
table – and this is something many Australians will ultimately pay for both financially, and with their 
health. 
 
Given the foundational nature of insulation for the health of occupants and improving 
energy efficiency of buildings, the AIIC continues to call on governments to act by: 
▪ Implementing incentives that increase the uptake of insulation.  
▪ Ensuring that adequate insulation is retrofitted into all social housing, including public and 
community housing. 
▪ Introducing minimum standards for insulation in rental properties. 
▪ Introducing mandatory energy rating disclosure when homes are sold.  
▪ Considering regulatory interventions to stimulate residential rehabilitation, keep installers 
safe, and improve standards of quality and conformance. 
▪ Improving the general compliance and enforcement systems for installation of insulation in 
new buildings, including inspections prior to plaster.  
  

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 7 
 
The Value of Insulation 
REDUCING EMISSIONS AND SUPPORTING 
ELECTRIFICATION EFFORTS  
 
Insulation stops heat escaping buildings in winter and helps keep heat outside during summer by 
acting as a barrier to heat flow.5 There are a wide range of insulation products, and the best option 
can vary based on building type, local climate and whether the insulation is mainly to keep heat 
out, keep heat in, or both.6 
 
Well insulated homes and buildings reduce the need for heating and cooling, which in turn reduces 
energy use and therefore greenhouse gas emissions. This is a particularly valuable benefit given 
Australia’s homes alone are responsible for around 24 per cent of overall electricity use and more 
than 10 per cent of the nation’s total carbon emissions.7 
 
It is estimated that effectively insulating new and existing buildings could reduce 
Australia’s annual emissions by a substantial 7.1 million tonnes of CO2e.8  
 
Beyond direct emissions reductions, reduction of energy waste through improved thermal 
performance can have other benefits which support Australia’s transition to net zero emissions. 
For example, the efficient use of reverse-cycle air conditioners can support the grid by pre-heating 
and pre-cooling homes to better match energy supply and demand in a renewably powered energy 
system.  
 
Pairing efficient heating and cooling solutions with a high  performing thermal building 
shell has a double dividend – both by reducing energy wasted through heat transfer to and from 
the environment, and by reducing the size of heating and cooling infrastructure needed to maintain 
healthy comfortable homes.  
 
Insulation can substantially reduce the demands on energy systems when deployed at scale. This 
is particularly valuable for moderating  residential secto r energy demand , which is the most 
misaligned with periods of high supply of low-cost renewable energy (principally solar PV).  
 
Efforts to reduce heating load through improving the thermal performance of buildings will have a 
significant impact on reducing the amount of new supply infrastructure (such as storage) required 
to cover residential energy demand.  
 
  
 
5 Your Home, Insulation.  
6 Ibid.  
7 Residential buildings, Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. 
8 Industry-led roadmap for quality control and safety in insulation installation, p.4. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 8 
Energy-efficient reverse-cycle air conditioners are a core technology for electrifying and reducing 
the emissions of homes and workplaces. However, research has shown that the insulation and 
thermal performance of a space can drastically improve the comfort levels of occupants  using 
reverse-cycle air conditioning for space heating and cooling.  
 
Insulation is crucial for supporting a successful rapid deployment of reverse cycle air 
conditioners in Australia.  
 
Unlike traditional heaters, reverse cycle air conditioners when used for heating will expel warm air 
(rather than hot) and are generally placed nearer to the ceiling. This means if the building is poorly 
insulated, the surface temperatures are low and heat losses and temperature drops are high. The 
cooled air from these surfaces will flow close to the floor which creates a “wind chill” effect, leading 
to uncomfortable and dissatisfied occupants.9  
 
Good thermal performance prevents over-investment in oversized appliances and batteries at a 
household level, helps  households to maximise the benefits of solar generation , and in turn 
removes pressure from the grid . Managing peak demand is especially critical  during the winter 
where space heating is a large contributor to both gas and electricity demand.10 
 
Given this, it is no surprise that  world-leading jurisdictions in energy efficiency retrofits, such as 
Ireland, will not upgrade appliances or install solar and batteries via their retrofit programs until 
the thermal performance of the home is addressed.  
 
Where Ireland can address retrofits at a nation al level, an example of a leading state-based 
program which integrates thermal performance as a complementary measure to energy efficiency 
upgrades is the New York State Energy and Research Development Authority (NYSERDA) heat 
pump program (NYS Clean Heat Program).  
 
The NYS Clean Heat Program implementation plan included development of a complementary  
Comfort Home program to build markets for “heat-pump ready” services that provide consumers 
with improvements in building envelopes to accompany new heat pump solutions, acknowledging 
that both are needed to reduce thermal load and peak energy demand.11 NYSERDA’s investment 
in the Comfort Home program aimed to serve 10,000 households  and offer heat-pump ready 
services, such as insulation upgrades, statewide.12  
 
Thermal performance upgrades are the foundation of successful energy efficiency retrofits and 
should be of the highest priority as Australia electrifies and prepares for a net zero future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 The Conversation, Replacing gas heating with reverse-cycle aircon leaves some people feeling cold. Why? And what’s the solution? 
2023.  
10 ACEEE, Building electrification: programs and best practices, 2022, p. 34. 
11New York State Energy Research and Development Authority et al., NYS Clean Heat: Statewide Heat Pump Program Implementation 
Plan, Version 6, 2023, p.60. 
12 Ibid, p.61. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 9 
HEALTH, COMFORT, AND CLIMATE ADAPTATION  
 
Australians spend about 90 per cent of their time indoors,13 yet have some of the least energy 
efficient homes in the world.14 Eight million of Australia’s 10 million homes are likely to be 
inefficient as they were built before the introduction of mandatory minimum energy efficiency 
requirements. These older homes tend to be poorly insulated and draughty.   
Improving the efficiency of homes improves the physical and mental health of the people 
living in them. 
 
There is substantial evidence to show that the thermal performance of a home or workplace has 
a direct connection to the standard of health enjoyed by its occupants.  
Despite the poor state of Australia’s housing stock and this known connection to health, little has 
been done to incentivise material improvement. The National Construction Code (NCC) has 
been slow to raise standards for thermal performance, and many states and territories have 
been slower still in administering the improvements that have been secured in the NCC.  
There are, however, some positive efforts to improve the health and comfort of Australian homes 
through energy performance upgrades.   
 
The Victorian Healthy Homes Program was a randomised controlled trial designed to measure the 
impact of an energy efficiency and thermal comfort home upgrade on temperature, energy use, 
health and quality of life  for vulnerable occupants . Each household received a pre and post 
upgrade Victorian Residential Efficiency Scorecard assessment of their home by a qual ified 
assessor. This informed the choice of upgrades delivered to the home, prioritising energy 
efficiency and warmth.  
 
The range of upgrades included insulation (ceiling, underfloor), draught sealing, space heating 
(reverse-cycle air conditioning or gas heater replacement), and internal window coverings. The 
target average cost per upgrade was $3,500.15 
 
Analysis indicated that these relatively minor upgrade s had wide-ranging benefits.16 These 
benefits included healthcare savings of almost $900 per person over the winter period. In fact, in 
this program, for every $1 saved in energy, more than $10 was saved in healthcare.17 
 
In New Zealand, a similar program to install insulation in the homes of vulnerable people delivered 
an estimated NZD $7 in benefits for each dollar spent, largely due to improved health outcomes.18 
These included benefits in many areas of health, including reduced hospitalisation, medical visits, 
days off school or work and pharmaceutical cost savings.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 DCCEEW, Indoor Air. 
14 American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), International Energy Efficiency Scorecard, 2022. 
15 Sustainability Victoria, The Victorian Healthy Homes Program Research findings, 2022, p.6. 
16 Ibid, p.5. 
17 Ibid.  
18 Grimes et al., Cost Benefit Analysis of the Warm Up New Zealand: Heat Smart Programme Ministry of Economic Development 
(2012). 
19 Ibid.  

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 10 
When we talk about health, we don’t just mean physical health.  
 
A growing number of studies show that through the reduction of thermal discomfort and anxiety 
related to fuel poverty or bill strain, energy efficient homes improve mental and social health 
outcomes.20 This is especially relevant to economically and socially vulnerable Australians, who 
disproportionately experience energy poverty.21  
 
The power of insulation to help deliver improvements to thermal comfort and support better health 
indoors should be recognised. 
 
For example, taking a home from a 1 to 4 star NatHERS 22 rating will reduce the heating and 
cooling energy usage of a house in Melbourne by  about 65 per cent  – an upgrade that could 
conceivably be made through the installation of insulation alone.23 This would alleviate bill strain, 
and improve health and comfort for occupants.  
 
While upgrading older poorly performing homes to the current accepted standard of thermal 
performance and energy efficiency is important, recent research suggests even this may not be 
enough to protect health and comfort into the future.  
 
Australian homes are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and the energy ratings 
used to design them are not yet responding to the threat.24  
 
While newly  built, thermally efficient homes are still expected to outperform older homes in 
resilience to heat, climate change will put this  resilience under pressure.  Modelling by Renew 
found that by 2070, a home built in 2024 with a 7 star NatHERS rating will face similar indoor 
temperatures during hot summer conditions as a n uninsulated home with a 1.1 star rating does 
today.25 Meanwhile, if left unrenovated, that 1.1 -Star home will face even more extreme indoor 
temperatures.26 
 
Given hot and cold weather already kills around 3,000 Australians each year and upgrading 
homes can reduce the number of deaths from heatwaves by as much as 90 per cent while 
improving Australians’ health,27 the retrofit of Australia’s housing stock should be viewed as an 
investment in health and climate adaptation – not only as an energy bill saver.  
 
Commercial buildings are a cause for optimism.  
 
In stark contrast to residential buildings, Australia’s commercial buildings are some of the world’s 
top performers in energy efficiency.28  
Progress in this area has been accelerated by the introduction of mandatory commercial building 
disclosure (CBD) of energy efficiency ratings when commercial office space sized 1,000 square 
metres or more are advertised and leased.29  
 
20 EEC and ANZ, Putting Energy Efficiency to Work, 2023, p. 24.  
21 Brotherhood of St Laurence n.d., Affordable, clean energy.  
22 NatHERS, About NatHERS. 
23 Sustainability House, Residential improvements project: cost-effective energy efficiency improvements for a sample of 
new apartments, and existing houses and apartments in Australia, (2013), Pure Electric, What does the home energy star (NatHERS) 
rating system actually mean in terms of home heating?, (2019). 
24 Renew, Building for a changing climate, 2024. 
25 Ibid. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Industry-led roadmap for quality control and safety in insulation installation, p.4. 
28 American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), International Energy Efficiency Scorecard, 2022. 
29 Australian Government, CBD, A National Energy Efficiency Program. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 11 
 
A number of Australian and international studies have credibly linked energy efficiency 
improvements in offices and worker productivity from fewer sick days, reduced stress and 
improved employee morale.30  
For example, a review of Australia’s CBD program found retrofits carried out during the first 
years of the program delivered at least $168 million in improved occupant productivity, more 
than double the value of the energy savings.31 
To further build on this, the insulation industry supports the extension of CBD to buildings sized 
500 square metres or more.   
  
 
30 ACIL Allan 2015, Commercial Building Disclosure Program Review final report.  
31 Ibid.  

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 12 
Quality and safety 
 
The insulation industry has observed lingering  concern about the risks associated with 
government programs supporting insulation, given the well-publicised Royal Commission into the 
Home Insulation Program (HIP). This has led to a lack of government investment in insulation over 
the last decade, while other energy efficiency products, many of which are less effective in homes 
without insulation, have been incentivised instead.   
 
The findings of the Royal Commission have been taken seriously by industry, which has worked 
hard to ensure that the quality and safety issues evident in the HIP are addressed so that future 
programs, schemes, and regulatory interventions can b e safely and effectively rolled out to the 
benefit of the community.  
 
Getting quality and safety right is essential to building well-insulated buildings that 
support the clean energy transition.  
 
At the centre of the industry’s work on quality and safety  is the Roadmap for quality control and 
safety in insulation installation  and its underlying report Ensuring quality control and safety in 
insulation installation. 
 
Despite the significant work done by the industry , without government support (whether through 
incentives, the utilisation of regulatory drivers, or both), Australia’s underperforming housing stock 
is unlikely to be upgraded to the standard needed to support climate adaptation into the future, or 
to best manage energy demand through the energy transition. This will result in poor financial and 
health outcomes for millions of Australians.  
 
Governments must move in a clear, nationally consistent direction toward safe, sensible support 
for increased uptake of insulation. This can be done safe ly at scale, particularly  for residential 
retrofits, by following the AIIC’s quality and safety advice on the following matters:  
▪ Training- installers contracted to undertake insulation work hold an EEC Certified 
Insulation Installer certification, or equivalent. 
▪ Product- insulation materials used have independent third-party building product 
certification through the Australian Building Codes Board administered CodeMark 
Certification Scheme, or similar JAS-ANZ governed certification scheme. 
▪ Application - fit for purpose application of products supported by appropriate warranties. 
▪ Electrical safety - electrical safety inspection undertaken by a licensed electrician prior to 
installation. 
▪ Compliance - programs, schemes, and regulation to include compliance activity such as 
independent audit, with material consequences for non-compliance. 
▪ Stability - programs and schemes run for steady, sustained periods of time to avoid 
goldrush scenarios that create conditions for non-certified installers and non-conforming 
product to flood the market.   
 
  

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 13 
Market update 
There is a general lack of data on the energy efficiency of Australian buildings, particularly 
residential buildings.  
This is in part because small upgrades Australians make to their properties (such as insulation 
installation) generally go unrecorded. Further, there is no national mandatory disclosure of 
residential energy efficiency ratings when homes are sold – which would be one of the best points 
at which to collect data on the efficiency of homes.  
A lack of data can be a barrier to policy and program development, as data is essential for 
evidence-based decision making and allocation of resources.  
International jurisdictions – and the ACT – have had effective residential building rating and 
disclosure measures for existing buildings for  decades. Implementation of energy performance 
ratings, as well as mandatory disclosure at point of sale, would provide clear information to 
potential buyers as well as give decision makers the data they need to best understand the current 
thermal performance levels, and other efficiency levels, of Australian homes.  
In 2010, the Australian Government introduced a requirement for energy efficiency ratings to be 
disclosed when  offices 1,000 square metres or more  are advertised for sale or lease . This has 
reduced greenhouse gas emissions intensity in these buildings by over 50 per cent in the last 14 
years. This is one of the fastest widescale building transformations recorded anywhere in the 
world.32  
The implementation of mandatory disclosure of energy efficiency ratings for homes at the time 
they are sold could stimulate further residential rehabilitation activity for homes outside of rental 
and social housing markets. It would be extremely valuable for policy and research, drive 
emissions reductions, and help to close the data gap evident today.  
INSULATION LEVELS IN AUSTRALIAN HOMES 
Data from NatHERS helps provide insights into the insulation levels of Australia n homes 
constructed since 2018. While the data do es not represent direct observations of insulation R -
values in ceilings and walls 33, it gives a good indication of the insultation l ikely to be present in 
Australia’s recently constructed residential buildings. That said, when interpreting the analysis that 
follows, it is imp ortant to keep in mind that data are limited, particularly in some states and 
territories. Therefore, insulation levels —and changes in those levels —should be treated as 
indicative only. 
Figure 1 shows a clear demarcation between buildings in warmer versus cooler climates in 
Australia, with homes in temperate or cool climates in the southern states having higher levels of 
ceiling insultation than homes in states with hotter, humid climates in the north.  
 
32 Australian Government Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources, Energy efficiency in commercial buildings, 2022. 
33 NatHERS star ratings provide information about the energy performance of a home. A star rating is out of 10 and considers a home’s 
design, orientation, construction materials, as well as the local climate, with the vast majority of ratings taking place before a building 
is constructed. The CSIRO has conducted analysis of NatHERS certificates to infer the insulation levels in NatHERS-rated buildings. 
The data shown in this report is not a direct observation of what insulation was actually installed in these homes. Rather, it is based 
on building plans used in NatHERS calculations. 

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 14 
However, even in the cooler states, a relatively high proportion of the building fabric in rated homes 
contains no ceiling insulation – for example nearly 9 per cent in Victoria in 2023. 
 
 
Figure 1 Ceiling insulation R-value in NatHERS-rated standalone homes in 2023 by state. Note: Ceiling spaces rated 
as having no insulation are not necessarily part of the main living spaces in a home and could include garages, 
bathrooms, corridors, laundries, and other un-conditioned zones. 
4% 1% 15% 44% 28% 8%
10% 0% 8% 24% 34% 12% 12%
40% 15% 37% 8%
25% 0% 3% 50% 16% 4% 1% 0.5%
3% 2% 10% 24% 36% 24% 1%
6% 5% 5% 43% 28% 12% 2%
9% 0.01% 23% 13% 19% 14% 20% 2%
1% 0.3% 1%
4% 85% 5%
2%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
WA
VIC
TAS
None < R1.0 R1-1.9 R2-2.9 R3-3.9 R4-4.9 R5-5.9 R6-6.9 R7.0+
ACT
NSW
NT 
QLD
SA

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 15 
 
Figure 2 Wall insulation R-value in NatHERS-rated standalone homes in 2023 by state. 
Figure 2 shows wall insulation in NatHERS-rated standalone homes across all states and 
territories. There is less data for wall insulation, with a high proportion of NatHERS-rated homes 
shown as having “unknown” levels of wall insulation. As such, it is difficult to draw conclusions 
from this data other than the observation that in most states and territories, newer homes tend to 
have wall insulation rated at R2-2.9 levels, with less insulated wall spaces in Queensland the 
Northern Territory, where warmer climates influence building design.  
Figure 3 indicates that over the last five years, progress has been mixed in improving the least 
insulated buildings (those with a high share of their ceiling space without insulation or with 
insulation rated as below R1.0). The standout is the Northern Territory, where standalone homes 
with ceiling insulation of R1.0 or less have almost halved since 2018, but at 40 per cent in 2023, 
the number of poorly insulated homes remain significantly higher than the rest of the country. 
During the same period, buildings in Victoria, Western Australia, the ACT and New South Wales 
also saw shifts down in the share of ceilings with little to no insulation.  
In contrast, standalone homes in South Australia, Tasmania, and Queensland appear to have 
experienced a growth in the share of ceiling spaces with little to no insulation over that period, 
noting the data limitations mentioned above.  
Figure 3 suggests a particularly high potential for improvement in Queensland due to the 
continuing presence of poorly insulated ceilings there. At least some of the growth in uninsulated 
ceiling spaces in these states may be due to homeowners building larger garages (which tend to 
have uninsulated ceilings), which in turn may be linked to preferences for larger vehicles in 
recent years (as of March 2024, SUVs and light commercials make up over 70 per cent of new 
vehicles sold in Australia).34  
 
34 Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries, New Record for March New Vehicle Sales, April 2024. 
17.7% 5%
1.8%
75.5%
4.5% 8.4% 0.9% 8% 76.7% 0.8% 0.6% 0.04%
8% 57% 6% 7% 22%
37% 18% 0.5% 21% 23% 0.3%
7% 2% 1.4% 0.3% 87% 0.5% 2%
9.2% 0.3% 0.4% 89% 1.3%
8.7% 2.2% 4% 84% 0.2% 0.3%
17.5% 29% 29%
2%
22% 0.9% 0.4%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
WA
VIC
TAS
None < R1.0 R1-1.9 R2-2.9 R3-3.9 R4-4.9 R5.0 or greater
ACT
NSW
NT 
QLD
SA
Unknown

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 16 
 
Figure 3 Share of ceiling space in standalone buildings assessed with no insulation or insulation below R1.0 level by 
state, 2018 and 2023 (left) and change in share over the period (right) 
Figure 4 shows that over the last five years, the share of standalone homes rated as having R5+ 
levels of ceiling insulation, in climates where this level of insulation is most desirable, has 
increased across the country.  
Standalone buildings in the ACT have the highest share of well insulated ceilings, with nearly 80 
per cent of rated homes having ceiling insulation at R5+ level or higher. 
NSW has experienced the fastest growth in standalone homes with a rating of R5.0 or higher 
ceiling insulation, with the share of highly insulated ceilings more than doubling from 7.6 per cent 
in 2018 to 24.3 per cent 2023.  
Figure 4 also highlights the potential of Tasmania and Victoria to increase the number of rated 
homes that have R5+ level ceiling insulation. Currently, only 35 – 40 per cent of rated ceiling 
spaces in these states have this level of insulation, which is sub-optimal given their cooler 
climates.  
The data in Figures 3 and 4 indicate that most of the states that have updated their building 
standards or introduced other requirements, such as mandatory disclosure or minimum rental 
standards, are performing best with regards to insulation levels. Those that have been delayed 
in adopting new standards or failed to make other policy and regulatory interventions are 
performing the worst.  
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
ACT NSW NT QLD SA TAS VIC WA
Ceiling Insulation - 2018 Ceiling Insulation - 2023
-50% 50%
NT
ACT
NSW
WA
VIC
QLD
TAS
SA
Improvement Decline

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 17 
 
Figure 4 Share of ceiling space in standalone buildings assessed with insulation at R5.0 or more by state, 2018 and 
2023 (left) and change in share over the period (right). Note: Northern Territory and Queensland are not shown 
because ceiling insulation of R5.0 or higher is negligible. 
 
THE INSULATION INSTALLATION INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA 
 
The insulation services industry is expected to generate over $730 million in FY2024, employing 
between 5,000 to 6,000 workers across 3,820 businesses.35 
 
To provide a snapshot of the installation industry, the Energy Efficiency Council, on behalf of the 
AIIC, surveyed insulation businesses across six states and territories about their activities during 
the 2023  calendar year . The businesses were all medium sized, with an average of 30 staff 
members.  This offers a modest observation of how the installer market in Australia is faring, and 
how it interacts with current policy and regulatory barriers and enablers. 
 
The data collected will not offer insight into smaller businesses, which are common in the 
insulation installation trade. This is acknowledged as a limitation of the data. However, some broad 
conclusions can still be drawn from these results.  
 
Businesses surveyed conducted over 28,300 residential installations, (an average of 2,500 per 
business) in the 2023 financial year. As demonstrated by Figure 5, of these 2 8,300 jobs, the 
majority were in new buildings. To put this into perspective, this represents around one quarter of 
the 113,266 residential homes completed in 2023.36 
 
Fibreglass batts were the insulation material most commonly used across surveyed businesses, 
with over 2 million square metres installed  during 2023, enough to cover the Melbourne Cricket 
Grounds 100 times.  
 
 
35 IbisWorld, INDUSTRY REPORT: Insulation Services in Australia, August 2023. 
36 Australian Bureau of Statistics, Building Activity Australia, 2024.  
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
ACT SA TAS VIC NSW WA
Ceiling Insulation - 2018 Ceiling Insulation - 2023
0% 50% 100% 150% 200% 250%
VIC
SA
TAS
ACT
WA
NSW
Improvement
d

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 18 
Businesses using spray foam and blow-in products were more active in the retrofit market, where 
these products may have the advantage of being less disruptive to the existing building fabric than 
batts.  
 
Policy drivers to build the market for retrofitting homes with insulation (insultation retrofitting) could 
increase demand for installers to perform retrofits, while delivering energy performance benefits 
to the community. 
 
 
Figure 5 Residential new build installs vs residential retrofit installs amongst surveyed businesses 
 
Amongst surveyed businesses, the ACT was a hot spot for insulation retrofits relative to its size, 
with between 2,000 to 3,000 retrofits completed by surveyed businesses in 2023, over 1 per cent 
of the ACT’s entire residential building stock.  The strength of the ACT result is not surprising given 
the policy interventions and support available for insulation in the ACT.  
 
Businesses surveyed employed staff in a range of roles, from installers to office administrators 
and other staff performing roles in sales and logistics. Across the surveyed businesses, installers 
made up the majority of staff employed, with over 20 instal lers per business on average, with 
administrative staff the next largest share of staff, averaging 6 per business (Figure 6). 
 
81%
19%
New Retrofit

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 19 
 
Figure 6 Average employment profile of surveyed insulation installation businesses 
 
 
The EEC did  collect data on commercial building installations, however very few respondents 
worked in the commercial space , therefore it was excluded from this report . However, the AIIC 
would reasonably expect the standard of thermal performance of Australia’s commercial buildings 
to be quite high, given Australia ranks highly for policy and practice in commercial buildings energy 
efficiency globally.37  
 
 
  
 
37 American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), International Energy Efficiency Scorecard, 2022. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Installers Other staff Office administrative


===== PAGE 20 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 20 
Policy and regulatory 
activity 
Ensuring that Australia’s homes are healthy, affordable, and decarbonised is a national 
infrastructure issue.  
Homes are not short-lived consumer goods – they generally last for decades and have 
dozens of occupants over their lifespan. 
A substantial portion of Australian homes lack basic measures to ensure thermal comfort and 
safety, such as insulation. Sadly, many of these homes are occupied by Australia’s most 
vulnerable people, and the poor performance of these dwellings presents long-term risks to the 
physical and financial welfare of their inhabitants.  
Insulation offers a cost-effective means of significantly improving the energy efficiency of 
buildings.  
However, unlike many other products supporting energy efficiency such as heat pumps, LED 
lights and induction cooktops there are few government incentives which support improving the 
thermal performance of homes. Regulatory interventions, including the introduction of minimum 
rental standards, have also been slow to materialise.  
Australia is missing the fundamental tools to help improve the energy performance of 
households: energy performance rating, disclosure, and minimum rental standards.  
Without residential energy ratings, the energy performance of existing homes cannot be 
evaluated and measured. Without mandatory disclosure of these ratings at point of sale, buyers 
and tenants lack the ability to make an informed decision about the likely energy performance of 
a home, and whether that poor performance could be easily remedied through the 
implementation of simple measures (such as installing insulation).  
Tenants lack agency, incentive, or the ability to make alterations to rental dwellings, so regulation 
to ensure that landlords provide a safe and healthy environment with an acceptable level of 
energy performance is required. Without minimum rental standards, the split incentives that 
deliver a universally poor standard of rental accommodation will continue to the detriment of 
tenants. Minimum rental standards are an essential regulatory intervention to ensure that the 
rental housing stock meets adequate standards of thermal performance and ensure the health 
and safety of tenants.  
International jurisdictions – and the ACT – have had effective residential building rating and 
disclosure measures in place for existing buildings for decades. Evidence shows that mandatory 
disclosure, such as through the ACT scheme or NABERS38 and the Commercial Building 
 
38 NABERS, What is NABERS? 

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 21 
Disclosure program,39 has a material effect on the market and works to raise the average 
performance of buildings.40  
HOW ARE AUSTRALIA’S STATES AND TERRITORIES DOING? 
The AIIC has a suite of recommendations on how governments can improve the thermal 
performance of buildings through the installation of insulation. These recommendations include: 
▪ Implementation of government programs and schemes that increase the uptake of 
insulation.  
▪ Comprehensive insulation retrofits to all social housing, including public and community 
housing. 
▪ Consideration of regulatory interventions to stimulate residential rehabilitation, keep 
installers safe, and improve standards of quality and conformance. 
▪ Introduction of minimum energy efficiency standards that ensure that insulation is in place 
in rental properties.  
▪ Introduction of mandatory energy rating disclosure when homes are sold.  
▪ Improvement of general compliance and enforcement systems for installation of insulation 
in new builds. 
Summary of performance across the jurisdictions  
 ACT NSW NT QLD SA TAS VIC WA 
Government 
program(s) or 
schemes(s)         
Social 
housing 
upgrades         
Regulations, 
including 
minimum 
rental 
standards 
        
Mandatory 
disclosure 
        
General 
compliance  
 
Not 
assessed 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
*Licensing, 
but current 
industry 
certification 
and training 
standards not 
incorporated. 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
39 Australian Government, Commercial Building Disclosure Program (CBD) overview.  
40 ACIL Allen 2015, Commercial building disclosure program review final report, p.ii-iiii; Department of Industry, Science, Energy and 
Resources 2021, National framework for disclosure of residential energy efficiency information, Australian Government, p.5 

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 22 
 
 
Australian Capital Territory (ACT)  
The ACT is leading the way in Australia, having introduced the most policy and 
regulatory intervention measures to improve the thermal performance of its housing 
stock.  
 
In 2021, modelling and analysis exploring various options for an energy efficiency 
regulation found the introduction of a minimum ceiling insulation standard the most 
effective way to increase the energy efficiency of rental properties in the ACT.41 The 
ACT went on to introduce Australia’s first minimum energy efficiency standard for 
ceiling insulation in rental properties (2023). 
 
The ACT focus on improving the thermal performance of its housing stock extends 
beyond the introduction of minimum rental standards for ceiling insulation.  
 
The Sustainable Household Scheme (SHS) provides zero-interest loans to help with 
the costs of energy-efficient upgrades, including insulation.  
 
Energy efficiency upgrades to existing social housing are being conducted via the 
Home Energy Support  Program (with some Commonwealth funding).42 The AIIC 
understands insulation forms part of this work program.  
 
Across programs and regulation, the ACT requires the use of EEC Certified 
Insulation Installers and an electrical safety check prior to completing work. These 
safety provisions do not extend beyond activity stimulated by government programs 
or minimum rental standards at this time.   
 
Improving insulation and thermal performance is further encouraged by the ACT’s 
mandated disclosure scheme  for the sale and lease of residential homes. This is 
known as the ACT Energy Efficiency Rating Scheme (ACTHERS).43  
 
 
 
Tasmania 
In 2023, Tasmania announced that insulation would be added to the state’s Energy 
Saver Loan Scheme. The scheme provides no -interest loans to eligible applicants 
to fund the purchase price and installation of energy efficient products, including 
wall, floor, and ceiling insulation.  
 
Offering ceiling, wall and floor insulation is a particular strength of this program as it 
gives Tasmanians the flexibility to find the right insulation solution for their property 
type.  
 
Tasmania requires the use of EEC Certified Insulation Installers and an electrical 
safety check prior to compl eting work funded by the Energy Saver Loan Scheme . 
 
41 ACT Justice and Community Safety Directorate, Minimum energy efficiency standards for rental homes.  
42 DCCEEW, Expanding energy-efficient upgrades to ACT public homes, 2023.  
43 DCCEEW, National Framework for Disclosure of Residential Energy Efficiency Information: A collaborative project o f the 
Commonwealth,  state and territory governments, 2021, p.5.  

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 23 
The AIIC understands safety provisions do not extend beyond activity stimulated by 
the scheme at this time.   
 
In early 2024, the Tasmanian government announced additional efficiency upgrades 
to social ho using in partnership with the Commonwealth government through the 
Energy Savings Package . These upgrades will  include insulation and draught 
proofing, however the AIIC has been unable to confirm if  EEC Certified Insulation 
Installers will be used. 
 
With an active support program for insulation and upgrades to social housing, 
Tasmania is making great strides toward better thermal performance in its housing 
stock. However, Tasmania’s decision to defer consideration of the 7-star Nationwide 
House Energy Rating Scheme (NatHERS) energy efficiency rating provisions until 
the next iteration of the NCC in 202544 is of concern. This puts the quality of thermal 
performance in Tasmania’s new builds behind other jurisdictions and means these 
homes will likely need to be retrofitted later, at additional cost to homeowners. 
 
 
 
Victoria (VIC) 
In late 2023, Victoria’s Gas Substitution Roadmap Update  was released  which 
suggested an expansion of minimum rental standards to cover ceiling insulation and 
draught-sealing. Public consultation on implementation options  for this measure 
have yet to commence .45 Given that regulation is the most powerful tool to drive 
uptake, Victoria is in a strong position to achieve green status in the future if it 
proceeds with the proposed expansion of minimum rental standards and introduces 
complementary support programs.  
    
There is currently no requirement in VIC for an insulation installer to complete any 
training or certification, or to have an electrical safety check conducted before 
completing work. 
 
However, Victoria does offer limited application subsidies of between $350 to $600 
to support local installers to get certified as a Certified Insultation Installer.46 
 
 
 
New South Wales (NSW) 
In 2024, NSW (with financial support from the Commonwealth government) 
announced the upgrade of over 20,000 social housing properties to improve their 
energy efficiency.47 These upgrades are expected to include insulation and draught 
proofing. This is a step in the right direction for NSW, however given the size of this 
jurisdiction, there is still some way to go to ensure the housing stock gets the thermal 
performance upgrades it needs to function comfortably and affordably into the 
future.  
 
 
44 Tasmanian Government - Consumer Building and Occupational Services, National Construction Code 2022.  
45 As of 3 May, 2024. 
46 Accurate in May 2024.  
47 NSW Land and Housing Corporation, Over $200m in cost -of-living energy upgrades for over 30,000 NSW households , January 
2024.  

===== PAGE 24 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 24 
There is currently no requirement in NSW for an insulation installer to complete any 
training or certification or to have an electrical safety check conducted before 
completing work.  
 
However, NSW does offer limited  application subsidies of $900 to support local 
installers to get certified as a Certified Insultation Installer.48 
 
 
South Australia (SA) 
SA does not currently have any grants, incentives, or policies in place to increase 
the uptake of insulation. SA is unique in a regulatory sense as persons carrying on 
the business of insulation installation must hold a licence under the Building Work 
Contractors Act 1995 . However, despite the availability of  national industry -
endorsed training and certification for insulation installers, the knowledge and 
experience requirements associated with the license do not  include reference to 
them.49 SA could improve quality and safety standards in the insulation installation 
industry by adding insulation installer training and certification to the knowledge and 
experience requirements for licensing purposes . Electrical safety checks are 
encouraged, but not strictly required for all insulation work in SA. 
 
 
 
Northern Territory (NT) 
The NT does not currently have any grants, incentives, policies, or regulatory 
interventions in place to increase the uptake of insulation. 
 
In 2022 , the NT declined to adopt the 7 stars NatHERS thermal performance 
requirements under the NCC. It currently relies on standards developed over a 
decade ago, putting the NT’s new builds well behind the rest of the country in terms 
of thermal performance, at around 5 stars. There is no requirement in the NT for an 
insulation installer to complete any training or certification or to have an electrical 
safety check conducted before completing work. 
 
 
 
Queensland (QLD) 
QLD does not currently have any grants, incentives, policies, or regulatory 
interventions in place to increase the uptake of insulation. There is no requirement 
in QLD for an insulation installer to complete any training or certification or to have 
an electrical safety check conducted before completing work. 
 
 
 
Western Australia (WA) 
WA does not currently have any grants, incentives, policies, or regulatory 
interventions in place to increase the uptake of insulation. There is no requirement 
in WA for an insul ation installer to complete any training or certification or to have 
an electrical safety check conducted before completing work. 
 
 
48 Accurate in May 2024.  
49 Government of South Australia, Business criteria  Contractors: companies and individuals.  

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
 
 
INSULATION IN AUSTRALIA 2024 25 
Acknowledgements 
Thank you to the organisations that assisted in the preparation of this report: 
▪ Australian Modern Building Alliance (AMBA), an interest Group of Chemistry Australia; 
▪ Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO); 
▪ Energy Efficiency Council; 
▪ Insulation Australasia;  
▪ Insulation Council of Australia and New Zealand (ICANZ); and 
▪ James Hooper Design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMERS 
This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part 
may be reproduced without prior written permission from the Affiliated Insulation Industry 
Coalition.  
Questions regarding reproduction should be addressed to the Affiliated Insulation Industry 
Coalition c/o the Energy Efficiency Council, Level 18, 1 Nicholson Street, East Melbourne, 
Victoria 3002.  
Note: reasonable efforts have been made to ensure the contents of this publication are factually 
correct. However, the Affiliated Insulation Industry Coalition does not accept responsibility for the 
accuracy or completeness of the contents and shall not be liable for any loss or damage that 
may be occasioned directly or indirectly through the use of, or reliance of, the contents of this 
publication.  
 
 

===== PAGE 26 =====
 
 
 
 
 
