
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 1 
HOW ARE AUSTRALIA’S STATES AND TERRITORIES DOING? 
Last year, the AIIC released the report Insulation in Australia 2024, which included a traffic light 
summary of state and territory performance against industry recommendations for stimulating 
increased uptake of insulation in a way that promotes quality and safety. In 2025, we have 
revisited this summary.  
Since our last update, Victoria has made the most progress, earning an overall upgrade to 
green. This reflects the announcement that insulation will be included in the VEU from 2025, 
confirmation that certified insulation installers and pre-installation electrical safety assessments 
will be used in SHEPI-funded social housing upgrades, and the announcement of a minimum 
rental standard for ceiling insulation. 
Another noteworthy improvement is WA, receiving its first green rating against a 
recommendation, recognising the use of certified insulation installers and pre-installation 
electrical safety assessments in its SHEPI-funded social housing upgrades including insulation. 
This positive step has led to an increase of their overall rating from red (no activity/negative 
activity) to amber.  
The ACT continues to lead the nation, earning an overall green rating and green ratings across 
four of five recommendations with an amber for the fifth. The ACT reports having reached a 
critical mass of certified installers to support both regulatory and program delivery – a first in 
Australia.  
In contrast, South Australia has been downgraded to an overall red rating, with no progress 
reported across any recommendation category. The state’s regulatory decision to defer the NCC 
for 10 years is expected to negatively impact the quality and performance of new builds going 
forward, leading to a downgrade in status.  
As a reminder, our suite of recommendations on how governments can improve the thermal 
performance of buildings through the installation of insulation include: 
1. Implementation of government programs and schemes that increase the uptake of 
insulation.  
2. Comprehensive insulation retrofits to all social housing, including public and 
community housing. 
3. Consideration of regulatory interventions to stimulate residential rehabilitation, keep 
installers safe, and improve standards of quality and conformance. This includes 
introduction of minimum energy efficiency standards that ensure that insulation is in 
place in rental properties.  
4. Introduction of mandatory energy rating disclosure when homes are sold.  
5. Improvement of general compliance and enforcement systems for installation of 
insulation in new builds. 
  

===== PAGE 2 =====
Summary of performance across the jurisdictions  
 ACT NSW NT QLD SA TAS VIC WA 
Government 
program(s) or 
schemes(s)         
Social 
housing 
upgrades 
        
Regulations, 
including 
minimum 
rental 
standards 
        
Mandatory 
disclosure 
        
General 
compliance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
 
 
*Licensing, 
but current 
industry 
certification 
and training 
standards not 
incorporated. 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
 
 
Not 
assessed 
 
 
Australian Capital Territory (ACT)  
The ACT is leading the way in Australia, having introduced the most policy and 
regulatory intervention measures to improve the thermal performance of its housing 
stock. Most notably, the ACT introduced Australia’s first minimum energy efficiency 
standard for ceiling insulation in rental properties in 2023.  
 
The ACT’s focus on improving the thermal performance of its housing stock extends 
beyond the introduction of minimum rental standards for ceiling insulation. The 
Sustainable Household Scheme (SHS) provides zero-interest loans to help with the 
costs of energy-efficient upgrades, including insulation.  
 
Energy efficiency upgrades to existing social housing are being conducted via the 
Home Energy Support  Program (with some Commonwealth funding).1 Insulation 
forms part of the work program.  
 
Across programs and regulation, the ACT requires the use of EEC Certified 
Insulation Installers and a  pre-installation electrical safety assessment prior to 
completing work. These safety provisions do not extend beyond activity stimulated 
by government programs or minimum rental standards at this time.  
 
 
1 DCCEEW, Expanding energy-efficient upgrades to ACT public homes, 2023.  

===== PAGE 3 =====
Improving insulation and thermal performance is further encouraged by the ACT’s 
mandated disclosure scheme for the sale and lease of residential homes. This is 
known as the ACT Energy Efficiency Rating Scheme (ACTHERS).2  
 
The AIIC understands that on-site audits associated with programs are undertaken, 
however in 2025, the ACT Audit Office released a report Energy efficiency standard 
for rental properties , which flagged a need for the government to undertake 
proactive compliance associated with the minimum rental standard, rather than 
leaving it to tenants to police. The ACT can make improvements in this area, leading 
to the amber rating against the general compliance recommendation.  
 
 
Tasmania 
In 2023, Tasmania announced that insulation would be added to the state’s Energy 
Saver Loan Scheme. The scheme provides no -interest loans to eligible applicants 
to fund the purchase price and installation of energy efficient products, including 
wall, floor, and ceiling insulation.  Offering ceiling, wall and floor insulation  is a 
particular strength of this program as it gives Tasmanians the flexibility to find the 
right insulation solution for their property type.  
 
Tasmania requires the use of EEC Certified Insulation Installers and a  pre-
installation electrical safety assessment prior to completing work funded by the 
Energy Saver Loan Scheme. The AIIC understands safety provisions do not extend 
beyond activity stimulated by the scheme at this time.   
 
In early 2024, the Tasmanian government announced additional efficiency upgrades 
to social ho using in partnership with the Commonwealth government through the 
Energy Savings Package . These upgrades will  include insulation and draught 
proofing; however, Tasmania has declined  industry best -practice advice  to use 
certified installers in communications with the AIIC. For this reason, they are marked 
as red against the social housing upgrades recommendation.  
 
With an active support program for insulation and upgrades to social housing, 
Tasmania is making great strides toward better thermal performance in its housing 
stock. However, the Tasmanian government’s recent decision to defer changes to 
National Construction Code (NCC) 2025 and NCC 2028 will likely lead to sub -
optimal outcomes for households. This will put the quality of Tasmania’s new builds 
behind other jurisdictions and means these homes will likely need to be retrofitted 
later, at additional cost to homeowners. 
 
 Victoria (VIC) 
In late 2023, Victoria’s Gas Substitution Roadmap Update  was released  which 
suggested an expansion of minimum rental standards to cover ceiling insulation (in 
homes without any) and draught sealing. In June 2025, the government announced 
a decision to proceed with the standard.  
 
In April 2025 , the Victorian government announced that insulation would be re -
introduced into the VEU program in 2026.3 A VEU discount will become available to 
200,000 properties in the first instance, with the government intending to expand 
eligibility to under -insulated properties in time. The AIIC understands the 
 
2 DCCEEW, National Framework for Disclosure of Residential Energy Efficiency Information: A collaborative project of the 
Commonwealth,  state and territory governments, 2021, p.5.  
3 Premier of Victoria, Media Release: Cutting The Cost Of Insulation And Slashing Energy Bills, April 8, 2025.  

===== PAGE 4 =====
government intends to use certified insulation installers and require pre-installation 
electrical safety assessments.  
    
There is currently no requirement in VIC for an insulation installer to complete any 
training or certification, or to have a  pre-installation electrical safety assessment 
conducted before completing work. However, VIC is currently the only jurisdiction to 
provide financial support for installers through the offering of  application subsidies 
of between $350 to $600 to support them to get certified.4 
 
Victoria has been upgraded to green, reflecting strong progress across multiple 
fronts: incorporating best -practice industry advice in social housing upgrades, 
reintroducing insulation into the VEU with a similar focus on quality, introducing a 
minimum rental standard, and being the only state to offer financial support for 
installer certification. These steps show Victoria is well and truly on the right track. 
 
 
New South Wales (NSW) 
In 2024, NSW (with financial support from the Commonwealth government  SHEPI 
program) announced the upgrade of over 20,000 social housing properties to 
improve their energy efficiency.5 These upgrades will include insulation and draught 
proofing. The AIIC understands that Homes NSW has requested head contractors 
responsible for the delivery of SHEPI require insulation installers to be certified and 
undertake pre-installation electrical safety assessments.  
 
The Home Energy Saver Program (HESP) was publicly announced in September 
2024 as part of the NSW Consumer Energy Strategy and is expected to include 
insulation upon launch. Industry has provided formal recommendations to the NSW 
Government, including the u se of certified insulation installers and pre -installation 
electrical safety assessments. However, as the program has not yet been 
confirmed, it remains unclear whether best-practice advice will be adopted. If rolled 
out with appropriate quality and safety  measures, NSW has a strong chance of 
joining Victoria and the ACT with a green rating in the future. 
 
 
South Australia (SA) 
SA does not currently have any grants, incentives, or policies in place to increase 
the uptake of insulation. SA is unique in a regulatory sense as persons carrying on 
the business of insulation installation must hold a licence under the Building Work 
Contractors Act 1995 . However, despite the availability of  national industry -
endorsed training and certification for insulation installers, the knowledge and 
experience requirements associated with the license do not  include reference to 
them.6 SA could improve quality and safety standards in the insulation installation 
industry by adding insulation installer training and certification to the knowledge and 
experience requirements for licensing purposes. Electrical safety assessments are 
encouraged, but not strictly required for all insulation work in SA. 
 
The AIIC understands that SHEPI-funded social housing insulation upgrades are to 
take place in SA, however, the government declined industry best -practice advice 
to use certified installers and undertake pre-installation electrical safety 
assessments in all instances in communications with the AIIC. For this reason, they 
are marked as red against the social housing upgrades recommendation. 
 
 
4 Accurate in June 2025.  
5 NSW Land and Housing Corporation, Over $200m in cost-of-living energy upgrades for over 30,000 NSW households, January 2024.  
6 Government of South Australia, Business criteria  Contractors: companies and individuals.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
The SA government’s recent decision to restrict National Construction Code (NCC) 
changes for 10 years will likely lead to sub-optimal outcomes for households. This 
will put the quality of SA’s new builds behind other jurisdictions and means these 
homes will likely need to be retrofitted later, at additional cost to homeowners.  
 
SA has been downgraded to red, due to its refusal to adopt industry best -practice 
advice to support quality and safety in social housing insulation upgrades, its 
deferral of the NCC, and a lack of progress across all other recommended areas. 
 
 
Northern Territory (NT) 
The NT does not currently have any grants, incentives, policies, or regulatory 
interventions in place to increase the uptake of insulation.  At this stage, the AIIC 
understands thermal shell upgrades are not included in the SHEPI arrangements 
for the NT.7  
 
In 2022 , the NT declined to adopt the 7 stars NatHERS thermal performance 
requirements under the NCC. It currently relies on standards developed over a 
decade ago, putting the NT’s new builds well behind the rest of the country in terms 
of thermal performance, at around 5 stars. There is no requirement in the NT for an 
insulation installer to complete any training or certification or to have an electrical 
safety assessment conducted before completing work. 
 
 
Queensland (QLD) 
QLD does not currently have any grants, incentives  or regulatory interventions in 
place to increase the uptake of insulation. There is no requirement in QLD for an 
insulation installer to complete any training or certification or to have an electrical 
safety assessment conducted before completing work. 
 
SHEPI-funded social housing insulation upgrades are planned in Queensland. 
However, the government did not adopt key elements of industry best -practice 
advice—specifically, the use of certified installers and pre -installation electrical 
safety assessments —in the first tranche of upgrades. That said, the AIIC 
understands that the government intends to incorporate this advice in the 
forthcoming Queensland Community Housing Energy Upgrades (QCHEU) program. 
For this reason, Queensland has been upgraded from red  to amber and has 
received its first amber rating against the recommendation for social housing 
upgrades. 
 
 
Western Australia (WA) 
WA does not currently have any grants, incentives, or regulatory interventions in 
place to increase the uptake of insulation. However, WA has confirmed that they will 
undertake insulation upgrades as a part of their SHEPI -funded social housing 
upgrades and will require the use of certified insulation installers and pre-installation 
electrical safety assessments in line with best practice advice from industry.   
 
Outside of the SHEPI program, there is no requirement in WA for an insulation 
installer to complete any training or certification or to have a pre-installation electrical 
safety assessment conducted before completing work. 
 
 
 
7 DCCEEW, Social housing energy performance. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
THE COMMONWEALTH 
Although not formally ranked in our table, the Commonwealth has made some noteworthy 
progress over the past few years. 
The Household Energy Upgrades Fund (HEUF), administered by the Clean Energy Finance 
Corporation and its partners, includes insulation and follows best-practice industry advice by 
requiring pre-installation electrical safety assessments and the use of certified insulation 
installers. 
The $800 million Social Housing Energy Performance Initiative (SHEPI) supports states in 
delivering major upgrades—including thermal shell improvements—to social housing across the 
country. SHEPI is expected to reach more than 100,000 properties and will run until 2029.8  
However, the Commonwealth has left program delivery to the states and, to date, has not 
released any formal requirements or recommendations for states to follow best-practice quality 
and safety standards, such as pre-installation electrical assessments or the use of trained and 
certified installers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
Reasonable efforts have been made to ensure the contents of this publication are factually 
correct. However, the Affiliated Insulation Industry Coalition does not accept responsibility for the 
accuracy or completeness of the contents and shall not be liable for any loss or damage that 
may be occasioned directly or indirectly through the use of, or reliance of, the contents of this 
publication.  
 
8 DCCEEW, Social housing energy performance. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
 
 
 
 
